【八月五日　港獨集會　賴綺雯發言】 (Alice Lai's Speech in the Hong Kong
Independence Rally on Aug 5)

抄本：Jack
英譯：Timothy


各位你哋好。我係保守黨嘅賴綺雯。首先多謝民族黨籌辦今次嘅晚會。

Hello, I am Alice Lai from the Hong Kong Conservative Party. Firstly, I’d like
to thank Hong Kong National Party for organising this rally.


今晚呢個集會，我同其他被剝奪參選資格嘅候選人，同埋你哋每一位嘅心情都係一樣：既沮
喪，亦憤怒。沮喪，係因為香港已經變得越嚟越陌生喇；憤怒，係因為港共政府，為咗達到
政治目的，不惜犧牲公務員政治中立嘅傳統，赤裸裸咁破壞香港嘅法治。我哋今日聚首添馬
公園，係基於一個共同嘅目的：我哋要捍衛我哋嘅參選權同埋選舉權。

Tonight, I feel the same way as other candidates who were stripped of their
right to run in this election, and everybody else here: frustrated and furious.
 Frustrated, because Hong Kong has become more and more unfamiliar.  Furious,
because the Hong-Kong-Communist Government, in order to fulfill their political
agenda, threw the tradition of political neutrality of public servants out of
the window, blatantly destroying the rule of law in Hong Kong. We gather here
tonight at Tamar Park, based on a common goal: We want to defend our rights to
elect and be elected.


我哋絕對唔會容許港共政府，無理剝奪我哋嘅基本權利。中英聯合聲明保障香港原有嘅生活
方式五十年不變。基本法２０４７年就會到期喇，不論歸英，永續基本法歸中，定係獨立，
都係對香港前途問題提出解決方法。討論同尋找解決香港前途問題嘅方法係理所當然，亦都
係我哋作為香港人嘅責任。

We will not allow the Hong-Kong-Communist government to deprive us of our basic
rights. The Sino-British Joint Declaration safeguarded Hong Kong’s way of
living for 50 years. However, the Basic Law will expire in 2047. Whether we
return to British rule, return to Chinese rule via perpetuation of the Basic
Law, or become an independent country, we are proposing solutions to the
problem of Hong Kong’s future. Discussing and finding solutions to this problem
is a matter of course, and it is our responsibility as a citizen of Hong Kong.


港共政府連討論，走入議會咁基本嘅事都嘗試去禁止我哋，試問呢一個政權，仲會企係香港
人嘅一邊咩？Self-determination，前途自決，係香港人嘅權利。１９７２年，我哋呢一個
權利被中國剝奪咗。我哋今日就要攞返返嚟。我哋喺自己嘅土地決定自己嘅命運。

But the Hong-Kong-Communist government is trying to bar us from even touching
the issue such as discussing this problem or entering the Legislative Council.
Do you think a regime like this is truly on Hongkongers’ side?
Self-determination is a right of Hongkongers. In 1972, we were stripped of this
right by China. We are going to get it back today. We shall determine our own
future on our own soil.


仲記得以前好靚嘅香港嘛？香港曾經係一個充滿希望，充滿活力嘅城市。以往嘅香港匯聚東
西文化，面向世界。我記憶中嘅香港人，唔怕面對逆境，勇於接受挑戰。我哋嘅政府，曾經
係高效率，廉潔。我哋嘅司法獨立，法律前人人平等自由。但係呢啲嘅優勢，已經慢慢成為
過去。今日嘅香港不停咁被中國腐化。

Do you still remember what was a beautiful Hong Kong? Hong Kong was a city full
of energy and full of hope. Hong Kong used to be where East meets West, facing
the world. I remember Hongkongers as ones who were not afraid of adversities,
who faced challenges head-on. Our government was efficient and uncorrupt. We
enjoyed judicial independence, where everybody was equal and free before the
law. But these edges have become a thing in the past. Today, Hong Kong is
constantly being corroded by China.


香港人對前景感到絕望。香港而家只係識得一面倒靠向中國。政府唔再廉潔，司法獨立面臨
最大嘅危機。香港人，你甘心嘛？有人會問：歸英，係咪即係要返回過去呢？正正相反。歸
英係面向未來。歸英，係一個選擇，係一個可以俾香港人思考解決前途問題嘅方法。歸英，
係一個可以保護香港嘅英國文化制度嘅一個方法。英國係一個民主國家。民主國家必須要重
視民意。大家都明白，香港無論香港獨立，歸英定係自決，都會面臨中國嘅全面打壓。而我
哋亦都需要英國、美國、西方國家嘅支持。歸英嘅訴求就係清楚向英國表達香港人對前途嘅
意願，同提醒香港仲有７５０萬嘅英國國民。

Hongkongers are driven to despair thinking about their future. Nowadays, Hong
Kong only knows to submit to China. The government is no longer honest, and
judicial independence is facing its biggest crisis. Hongkongers, are you
content with this? Some may ask: Does returning to British rule mean going
backwards? No, quite the contrary; it is the way forward. It is a choice, a
means for Hongkongers to consider their future. It is a way to to protect
institutions and culture left by the British. UK is a democratic country, and
democratic countries must respect the view of its people. It goes without
saying that whether Hong Kong becomes an independent country, returns to
British rule or undergoes self-determination, it will face total suppression
from China. And we need the support of UK, USA and other western countries. The
appeal of returning to British rule is about making it clear to Britain our
wishes regarding our future, and reminding them of the 7.5 million British
citizens they left behind.


中國嚴重違反中英聯合聲明，要求英國宣告中英聯合聲明失效，並宣告英國恢復對香港嘅主
權，合情合理，以史為鑑。喺英國嘅保護下達成真正自治，好似直布羅陀，百慕達咁樣，係
香港最好嘅選擇，我會繼續為香港嘅未來努力。多謝各位！

China has severely violated the Joint Declaration. Demanding the UK to declare
the Declaration null and void, and to declare resumption of sovereign rights
over Hong Kong, is reasonable, fair and backed by history. Achieving full
autonomy under British protection, like Gibraltar and Bermuda, is the best
choice for Hong Kong. I will continue to fight for Hong Kong’s future. Thank
you!
[ The English translation is released under Creative Commons, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 ]



＝＝＝＝＝＝＝
From Alice Lai

各位，你哋好！我係保守黨嘅賴綺雯。首先多謝香港民族黨，籌辦今晚呢個集會。今晚呢個
集會，我同其他被剝奪參選權嘅候選人，同埋你地每一位嘅心情，都係既沮喪又憤怒。沮喪
，係因為香港
已經變得越嚟越陌生；憤怒，係因為香港特區政府為咗達到政治目的，不惜犧牲公務員政治
中立的傳統，赤裸裸咁破壞香港嘅法治。

我哋今日聚首係添馬公園，係基於一個共同目的，我哋要捍衛我哋嘅參選權同選舉權，我哋
絕對唔會容許香港特區政府，無理剝奪我哋嘅基本權利。

中英聯合聲明保障香港原有生活方式五十年不變，基本法2047年就會到期，不論歸英，永續
基本法歸中，定獨立，都係對香港嘅前途問題提出解決辦法。討論同尋找解決香港前途問題
嘅方法，係理所當然嘅事，亦都係我哋作為香港人嘅責任。香港特區政府連討論，走入議會
咁基本嘅事都嘗試禁制我哋，試問呢個政權仲會企係香港人呢一邊嗎？

Self determination
前途自決，係香港人嘅權利。1972我哋呢個權利被中國剝奪咗，我哋今日就要攞返返嚟，係
自己嘅土地決定自己嘅命運。

仲記得以前好靚嘅香港嗎？香港曾經係一個充滿希望，充滿活力嘅城市。以往嘅香港融匯東
西文化，面向世界。我記憶中嘅香港人唔怕面對逆境，勇於接受挑戰。我哋嘅政府曾經係高
效率又廉潔，我哋嘅司法獨立，法律前人人平等自由。但係呢啲優勢慢慢已成過去。今日嘅
香港不停咁俾中國腐化，香港人對前景感到絕望，香港而家只識一面倒面向中國，政府唔再
廉潔，司法獨立面臨最大嘅危機。香港人，你甘心嗎？

有人會問歸英，即係要返回過去？正正相反，歸英面向未來。歸英，係一個選擇，一個可以
比香港人思考解決前途問題嘅方法。歸英，係可以保護香港嘅英國文化制度 嘅一個辦法。

英國係民主國家，民主國家必須重視民意。

大家都明白無論香港獨立，歸英定自決，都會面臨中國嘅全面壓制，我哋亦需要英國、美國
、西方世界嘅支持。歸英嘅訴求就係清楚向英國表達香港人對前途嘅意願，同埋提醒香港仲
有3.5百萬名英國國民。

中國嚴重違反《中英聯合聲明》，要求英國宣告《中英聯合聲明》失效，並宣告英國恢復對
香港嘅主權，合情合理，以史為鑑，係英國嘅保護下達成真正自治，好似直布羅陀，百慕達
，係香港最好嘅選擇，我會繼續為香港嘅未來努力。多謝各位！
