【八月五日　港獨集會　陳浩天發言 #4】 (Chan Ho-tin's Speech #4 in the Hong Kong
Independence Rally on Aug 5)

抄本: Sidney
英譯: Sidney

陳浩天：
多謝大家。嚟到十一點幾嘞，我知道大家都可能會辛苦啦，有人未食飯趕過嚟啦，又熱啦，
又多好多啲唔知嗰啲咩呀，好多蚊呀，飛蟻呀，曱甴嗰啲噉嘅嘢。噉大家都留到最後一刻。
好多謝大家。
今日，再一次道歉啦，我哋安排不周，唔好意思。都好多謝大家留到咁後。其實你哋都係好
忠實嘅香港獨立支持者架喇，因為，留到咁夜咁辛苦，都仲有咁多人喺度。噉呀，有記者問
我會唔會公佈人數，我都唔知呀，因為我冇諗過呢樣嘢。但我驟眼睇應該都過萬啦下話。（
台下拍手歡呼）好～多人喎。我返去慢慢睇啲相⋯ J 返。（笑）大家都返去 J
下。噉，希望我哋今次搞呢個和平集會嘅決定係正確啦。

Chan Ho-tin:
Thank you, everyone. It is already 11 o’clock, I know you are all tired.
Perhaps you haven’t had dinner yet. The weather is so hot, and there are these
mosquitoes, flying ants, cockroaches, those things scurrying around.  But you
are staying until the very end. Thank you, everybody.  Today, I want to
apologize again, there were some hiccups in our arrangements, sorry about that.
I want to thank everybody for staying till the very end. In fact, you folks are
the most loyal supporters of Hong Kong Independence. Because, even though it’s
so uncomfortable here, so many people still here. Well, some reporters asked me
whether I would announce the number of participants in this assembly, I don’t
know… because I haven’t thought about this matter.  But at a glance, there must
be more than 10,000 people, right? (Crowd cheers) There’s *really* a lot of
people here. Let me go back home, look at the photos, and feel good about it.
(Laughs) Everybody, think about this for a moment when you get back home, and
feel good about it. Let's hope we made a correct decision to hold this peaceful
assembly.

我哋都去到最後嘞，噉就我要點講呀，簡短少少啦，係啦。噉我一開頭講嘅時候就係話，黑
夜已經來臨，黑夜可能會真係好黑暗，好辛苦，但係大家堅持住。我相信呢⋯掂嘅。大家咁
辛苦都仲喺度聽緊，冇問題嘅。

We’re at the close of this event, so I should, how to put it, keep it brief.  I
said at the beginning, darkness has already fallen upon us, and darkness may be
really dark, there may be great hardships, but we should persevere. I
believe... we will make it. Everybody is still here despite being so
uncomfortable, so there’s no problem we can’t solve.


我哋嚟緊有啲方向啦，話俾大家聽啦。第一樣嘢，我哋係絕對支持同埋鼓勵呢，喺各大大專
院校同埋中學呢，係繼續傳播香港獨立。我見到近來已經係有啲本土組織喺唔同嘅中學呢係
已經成立啦，我哋絕對係支持嘅。如果有啲乜嘢嘅需要，即管同我哋講。
我哋會絕對去支援你哋。你要傳單，俾錢去印，我哋⋯雖然我哋都冇錢啦，啱啱堂主講咗個
好重要嘅問題，我哋冇錢，projector 都掙啲燒埋，然後樣樣嘢都⋯
我依個呢要拆返去當床單喺度瞓呀，好鬼貴架真係。跟住，要啲乜嘢嘅意見，我哋俾佢，要
啲乜嘢嘅 advice
我哋俾佢，絕對支持。然後，我哋最好就係能夠奪取各大嘅學生會，我哋希望獨派嘅人能夠
去做各大大學嘅學生會。（拍手）

I’ll tell you about our future directions. First of all, we absolutely support
and encourage all tertiary and secondary schools to continue to spread the word
about Hong Kong Independence.  I noticed that some Localist organizations have
already been established in various secondary schools. We absolutely support
this. If they need anything, just let us know. We will absolutely support you.
If you need to distribute leaflets, need money to print them, we… although we
don’t have money either, just now Lewis mentioned a very important issue: we
don’t have money! The projector almost blew up, and then everything is… I have
to take down this thing (backdrop) and take it home and use it as a bedsheet.
It’s so damn expensive. Anyway, if you need any suggestions, we will give you;
if you need any advice, we will give you. We will absolutely support you. And
it would be great if we could take over the student unions of universities. We
hope that pro-independence supporters can form the student unions of the
various major universities. (Crowd claps)

然後所有最堅實信念嘅，支持香港獨立嘅香港人，香港國民，希望你哋喺將來，黑夜來臨之
後，你哋去滲透對方，滲透政府各個部門，滲透警隊。我哋必須要學習佢哋嗰一套，（拍手
）我哋要獲得情報，呢個係好實在嘅。我哋嘅情報係非常之緊要，希望大家滲透入去，呢棟
大廈啦，立法會我哋入唔到住啦，解放軍軍營我諗大家都入唔到啦⋯⋯不過你哋入到我好支持
啦。總之我哋要滲透對方，任何一個界別。你見到保皇黨，佢哋有自己嘅律師，醫生乜乜物
物，泛民都會有。但係我哋獨派仲未有。有緊架喇，見習律師，或者學生律師。嚟緊架喇。
好快，就係我哋嘅世界。

And then, all the firm believers, all those who support Hong Kong Independence,
all nationals of Hong Kong, I hope that when the darkness falls upon us, you
will infiltrate our adversaries, infiltrate the various government departments,
infiltrate the police. We must learn their tricks (crowd claps), we need to
obtain intelligence, this is very practical. Sources of intelligence are
extremely important, I hope you will infiltrate them -- this building (central
government complex), we can’t get into the legislative council yet, I think
none of you can get into the People’s Liberation Army garrison… but if you can,
I support you. Anyway, we need to infiltrate them, all sectors.  Look at the
pro-establishment, they have their own lawyers, doctors, whatever. The
pan-democrats also. But we pro-independence folks don’t have these yet. But we
will soon, trainee lawyers, or law students, they’re coming. Very soon, it will
be our world.

但係大家要努力。仲係學生嘅，麻煩你哋，繼續搞學生組織，喺你哋校園度播獨，然後努力
讀書！中學生一定要努力讀書。知唔知呀。唔好話為咗啲街頭抗爭搞社運然後拋棄自己嘅將
來。絕對唔好。一定！一定要入大學，話俾大家聽。黃台仰都去⋯去咩啦去英國讀書啦，係
咪吖幾犀利？掉磚頭還掉磚頭⋯佢冇掉過嘅其實，都幾肯定架喇係呀，噉但係都要去讀書架
嘛係咪？讀好書，先至能夠建設香港，建設自己嘅國家。將來，你先至能夠管理到呢個地方
。好多人問我喎，好多記者問我，你話要管理香港，點樣管理啊？咪靠大家囉！係咪呀！你
哋每一位就係。我唔知你哋做緊乜嘢嘅行業。可能你係做緊老師，可能你係做緊謢士，可能
你只係學生，或者你係個社工、律師、醫生⋯我唔知道。但係大家喺自己嘅崗位盡力去推動
，將來每一個界別連合埋一齊嘅時候，香港，獨立。

But we need to strive for it. If you’re still a student, I urge you all,
continue to form student organizations, continue to spread the word about
independence in your school, and study hard! Secondary school students must
study hard, you know. Don’t throw away your future because of street protests
and social movements. Don’t do that. You must! You MUST enter university, I’m
telling you. Even Ray Wong will go to England to study, isn’t that great?
Despite throwing bricks… actually he never threw any, I’m sure about that… but
anyway you still need to study, right? Only after you do well academically, you
can build Hong Kong, build our own country. Only then, you will be able to
govern this place. A lot of people ask me, a lot of reporters ask me: “You say
you will govern Hong Kong, how will you do it?” We’re counting on you, right?!
Every one of you. I don’t know which occupation you’re in, maybe you’re a
teacher, a nurse, or just a student. Or maybe you’re a social worker, lawyer,
doctor, whatever. If everyone moves forward in their respective sectors, in the
future when we join together, Hong Kong will achieve independence.

然後，仲有啲咩講呀？係喇，（台下：香港獨立！）唔係呀唔係呀，唔好香港住，仲有嘅仲
有嘅最後一樣嘢就係我哋講嘅宣佈啦，即係頭先講咗我哋嘅路向啦，噉然後最後呢，就係關
於今次嘅選舉嘅。噉⋯話晒呢個集會都係因為選舉而出現嘅啫，噉都繼續講下選舉啦。我呼
籲大家，千祈唔好含淚。大家含咗淚，都好多年架喇。十幾二十年。每一次，唔知點解每一
個選舉，大家都要含架喎。即係「哦，今屆含咗淚，噉咪下屆咪會有希望囉。」即係永遠都
有人同你講「唏，今次含咗先啦，下次就會有啲新嘅選擇架喇，就唔使架喇，就唔使含淚架
喇。」啊但係偏偏今次含完，下一次又要含，我到到今次，都仲要含嘅，點解呢？我呼籲大
家，唔好含淚，投獨派，咪咪講錯咗，太興𡚒。千祈唔好含淚投呢個統派。唔好含淚投統派
！知唔知道！（台下：知道！）本來，九月四號呢，我係會出現喺張選票上面嘅！本來我哋
幾個都會嘅！但係而家冇嘞！唔緊要，大家如果你依然係想投票俾香港獨立嘅，依然想投票
俾民族黨，或者俾陳浩天嘅，請你繼續，用自己嘅方式，投票俾我。我唔會教你哋點樣做，
大家想像一下。千祈唔好含淚。投票俾我，繼續投票俾我。噉，大概係噉啦。

And then, what else? Right... (crowd: Hong Kong Independence!) No, no, not yet,
one final thing is our announcement… we announced our future directions, and
then, it’s about the election. So, we assembled here because of the election
after all, so let me talk about it. I call on everybody, do not accept any
compromise. We accepted compromises for so many years already. Ten years.
Twenty years. Every time, for some reason, at every election, we were made to
vote for a compromise candidate. They’re like “Oh, this time you made a
compromise, but there will be hope next time”. There’s always somebody to tell
you, “Don’t worry, if you make a compromise this time, there will be a new
option next time, you don’t have to do this again next time.” But it so happens
that if you made a compromise this time, you will have make a compromise next
time; Even in this election, I’m still being told to make a compromise. Why? I
call on everybody: do not accept any compromise and vote for independence. Wait
wait wait! I misspoke, I’m too excited. What I meant is: Do not accept any
compromise! Do not vote for unionists! Do not compromise with unionists!! Do
you understand? (Crowd: understood!)

Originally, on Sept 4, I will appear on the voting ballot! Originally, all five
of us will! But all is gone now!  But it doesn’t matter. If you still want to
vote for Hong Kong Independence, if you still want to vote for Hong Kong
National Party, or for Chan Ho-tin, please continue to vote for me in your own
way. That’s about it.

噉今日其實最重要嘅目的你知唔知我想做咩呢？點解要搞咁大嘅集會呢？係喇，冇錯，嗰邊
唔知邊位仁兄嗌嘅。就係嗌：香港獨立！香港獨立！香港獨立！香港獨立！香港獨立！！！
好！多謝大家！辛苦晒！

What is the most important thing today, do you know? Why did I organize this
assembly? Right, that gentleman over there, you’re right. The most important
thing is to shout: Independence for Hong Kong! Independence for Hong Kong!
Independence for Hong Kong! Independence for Hong Kong! Independence for Hong
Kong!! Good! Thank you everybody! Thank you all for your efforts!


[ The English translation is released under Creative Commons, CC BY-NC-ND 2.0 ]

